Skip to main content
sign in
become a supporter  subscribe search find a job dating more International edition 
The Guardian - Back to home
home	›	environment	
climate change
wildlife
energy
pollution
home	
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment selected	
tech
travel
browse all sections
Oil spills
BP platform leaks 95 tonnes of oil into North Sea
Spill 46 miles off Shetland is being monitored by air and said to be heading away from land and dispersing
 Clair platform production has been shut down for the time being.
 Clair platform production has been shut down for the time being. Photograph: BP/handout
 View more sharing options  This article is 1 year old
Shares
18,895
Adam Vaughan
@adamvaughan_uk
Monday 3 October 2016 18.20 BST Last modified on Tuesday 4 October 2016 14.18 BST
About 95 tonnes of oil have been leaked into the North Sea from a BP platform, the company has said.

The leak is about two and a half times smaller than the biggest North Sea spill in recent years, at Shell’s Gannet platform off Aberdeen in 2011.

The spill from the Clair platform is being monitored from the air by plane which, combined with modelling, shows the oil moving away from land in a northerly direction.

“The most recent surveillance flight already indicates significant dispersal of the oil at the surface,” the company said in a statement.


North sea oil spill 'worst for a decade'
 Read more
The platform, 46 miles (75km) west of Shetland, was shut down following the spill on Sunday at about 10am. The leak was caused by a technical issue with a system designed to separate the mixed production fluids of water, oil and gas, the company said following an investigation.

BP believes that allowing the oil to disperse naturally at sea is the best way to deal with the spill, although other options have not been ruled out.

In a statement, it said: “The release was stopped within an hour once the issue had been identified and Clair production was taken offline.”

Oil spill and environmental experts from BP, Oil Spill Response Limited and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy are said to have been working to assess any potential impact of the spill on the environment.

A spokesman for RSPB Scotland said: “There are currently many sensitive seabird species dispersing from their breeding colonies on Shetland and Norway out into the Atlantic, and these are potentially at risk. We need to know from BP and the maritime agencies exactly what type of oil has been spilled, if it is breaking up in the water column, and what the statutory conservation agencies are advising.

“It is critical that there is a full and open report of what has happened, with assurances that the situation will be monitored, and details of seabird concentrations in the vicinity revealed as soon as possible.”

Since you’re here …
… we have a small favour to ask. More people are reading the Guardian than ever but advertising revenues across the media are falling fast. And unlike many news organisations, we haven’t put up a paywall – we want to keep our journalism as open as we can. So you can see why we need to ask for your help. The Guardian’s independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters – because it might well be your perspective, too.

I appreciate there not being a paywall: it is more democratic for the media to be available for all and not a commodity to be purchased by a few. I’m happy to make a contribution so others with less means still have access to information.
Thomasine F-R.
If everyone who reads our reporting, who likes it, helps fund it, our future would be much more secure. For as little as $1, you can support the Guardian – and it only takes a minute. Thank you.

Become a supporter
Make a contribution
Paypal and credit card
Topics
Oil spills
BP
 
Oil and gas companies
 
Oil
 
Energy industry
 
Scotland
 
news
Share on LinkedIn Share on Pinterest Share on Google+
Reuse this content
Most popular

Trump 'incorrect' over Time person of the year claims, magazine says
 
Chinese bike share graveyard a monument to industry's 'arrogance'
 
Manchester United v Brighton, Tottenham v West Brom and more – as it happened
 
Is Lena Dunham's ‘hipster racism’ just old-fashioned prejudice?
 
How Trump is slowly destroying America's national security agencies | Jeffrey H Smith
 
promoted links
from around the web
Recommended by Outbrain
About this Content
You'll be speaking a new language in 3 weeks thanks to this app made in Germany
You'll be speaking a new language in 3 weeks thanks to this app made in Germany
BABBEL
Play this for 1 minute and see why everyone is addicted
Play this for 1 minute and see why everyone is addicted
VIKINGS
Tipalti Highlighted by Inc as 2017 Unicorn to Watch
Tipalti Highlighted by Inc as 2017 Unicorn to Watch
INC
How To Get Rid Of Under Eye Wrinkles in Days
How To Get Rid Of Under Eye Wrinkles in Days
BEAUTYHEADLINES
The Most Dangerous Species Found In The World
HORIZONTIMES
[Gallery] Remember 'The Human Barbie'? Well, You Should See Her Now
HORIZONTIMES
He Ran To His Car Thinking He Received A Ticket, But It Was A Different Note
BEDTIMEZ
Top 5 Best Free Virus Protection 2017
MY ANTIVIRUS REVIEW
[?]
most viewed
The Guardian back to top
home	
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment selected	
tech
travel
 all sections
environment	
›	oil spills

become a supporter
make a contribution
securedrop
ask for help
advertise with us
work for us
contact us
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
digital newspaper archive
all topics
all contributors
facebook
twitter
© 2017 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.