Unlike many news organisations, we haven’t put up a paywall – we want to keep the Guardian’s independent, investigative journalism as open as we can. It takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But advertising revenue is falling, so we need our readers to help make our future more secure. Support us for $6.99 a month.
Paypal and credit card
Become a Supporter
Close Skip to main content
sign in
become a supporter  subscribe search find a job dating more International edition 
The Guardian - Back to home
home	›	tech
home	
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech selected	
travel
browse all sections
Amazon
Amazon claims first successful Prime Air drone delivery
Trial only open to two customers in UK who have huge gardens, live close to an Amazon depot and want items that weigh less than 2.6kg
Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Amazon trials its Prime Air delivery service in UK – video
 View more sharing options  This article is 12 months old
Shares
858
Alex Hern
@alexhern
Wednesday 14 December 2016 15.02 GMT Last modified on Tuesday 21 February 2017 17.07 GMT
Amazon says it has successfully trialled its Prime Air drone delivery service in Cambridge, UK, by delivering a TV streaming stick and bag of popcorn directly to the garden of a nearby customer.

The breakthrough suggests that autonomous aerial delivery could become a viable business sooner than thought, albeit only for customers with huge gardens, who live close to the delivery depot, and want items weighing less than 2.6kg.

Additionally, while deliveries will be available seven days a week, the drones can only fly in daylight hours and clement weather. Currently, the trial is only open to two customers, but Amazon says it hopes to expand that to dozens in the coming months. For those customers, Prime Air is available for no extra cost.

The company says the delivery, which took place last week, involved fully autonomous flight, with no human pilot involved in the process. The success was announced by Amazon chief executive Jeff Bezos, who tweeted: “first ever #AmazonPrimeAir customer delivery is in the books. 13 min—click to delivery.” Amazon released a video of the flight but no press were invited to witness the test.

View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter
 
Jeff Bezos
?
@JeffBezos
First-ever #AmazonPrimeAir customer delivery is in the books. 13 min—click to delivery. Check out the video: http://amzn.to/primeair 
8:58 AM - Dec 14, 2016
 405 405 Replies   6,747 6,747 Retweets   7,755 7,755 likes
Twitter Ads info and privacy
Amazon’s drone testing facility on the outskirts of Cambridge has been operating since summer 2015, according to documents revealed under a freedom of information request. That was when the company invited the Civil Aviation Authority to witness its first test flight.

Government regulations in the UK are generally considered favourable to companies wanting to experiment with autonomous aircraft, but the restrictions still heavily limit what Amazon can test. The company is allowed to test drones that fly beyond line-of-sight in rural and suburban areas; flights where one person operates multiple largely autonomous drones; and sensor performance associated with sense-and-avoid technology.

Amazon first announced its intention to deliver packages by drone in 2013, in a lavishly-produced special on US TV show 60 Minutes. At the time, Bezos suggested that the company would begin delivery in 2018, a timescale commentators called “hugely optimistic”, citing a number of concerns around theft, liability and safety. The latest limited trials suggest that Amazon still intends to hit that 2018 target, albeit by sidestepping many of the concerns through the limited nature of the rollout.

Amazon isn’t alone in the field: Google’s experimental sibling, X, has a long-running drone delivery project of its own, Project Wing. Its prototypes use a fixed-wing drone, and are aimed at deliveries to particularly isolated rural customers.

Since you’re here …
… we have a small favour to ask. More people are reading the Guardian than ever but advertising revenues across the media are falling fast. And unlike many news organisations, we haven’t put up a paywall – we want to keep our journalism as open as we can. So you can see why we need to ask for your help. The Guardian’s independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters – because it might well be your perspective, too.

I appreciate there not being a paywall: it is more democratic for the media to be available for all and not a commodity to be purchased by a few. I’m happy to make a contribution so others with less means still have access to information.
Thomasine F-R.
If everyone who reads our reporting, who likes it, helps fund it, our future would be much more secure. For as little as £1, you can support the Guardian – and it only takes a minute. Thank you.

Become a supporter
Make a contribution
Paypal and credit card
Topics
Amazon
Drones (non-military)
 
E-commerce
 
Internet
 
Jeff Bezos
 
news
Share on LinkedIn Share on Pinterest Share on Google+
Reuse this content
Most popular

Donald Trump 'incorrect' over Time person of the year claims, magazine says
 
Chinese bike share graveyard a monument to industry's 'arrogance'
 
The Guardian view on Taylor Swift: an envoy for Trump’s values? | Editorial
 
Egyptian warplanes strike 'terrorist' targets after mosque attack kills 305
 
How Trump is slowly destroying America's national security agencies | Jeffrey H Smith
 
promoted links
from around the web
Recommended by Outbrain
About this Content
The Best Way To Invest In Bitcoin?
The Best Way To Invest In Bitcoin?
COIN STOCKS | CRYPTOCURRENCY INVESTMENTS & NEWS. THE FUTURE OF MONEY.™
Top 10 Coolest Gadgets under $50
Top 10 Coolest Gadgets under $50
BE TECH-SAVVY - LIFEGOOROO.COM
Eight Cars that Depreciate Least Over Time
Eight Cars that Depreciate Least Over Time
TOP CARS
[Gallery] Bernadette From The Big Bang Theory Is Completely Different In Real Life
[Gallery] Bernadette From The Big Bang Theory Is Completely Different In Real Life
WORLDATION
Hilarious Airplane Photos Captured On Board A Flight
GLORIOUSA
Using Your Mac for Work? Ditch Your OSX Apps for These 5 Smart Alternatives
GETAPP.COM
1 Simple Trick To Turn Off Your 'Check Engine' Light
THEDAILYWISEUS.DAILYNEWS.OVH
The Way Jack Nicholson Spends His Millions Is Totally Awesome
WORK+MONEY
[?]
most viewed
The Guardian back to top
home	
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech selected	
travel
 all sections
technology	
›	amazon

become a supporter
make a contribution
securedrop
ask for help
advertise with us
work for us
contact us
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
digital newspaper archive
all topics
all contributors
facebook
twitter
© 2017 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.